docs: oidc client assertions and pkce (#25375)
hashicorp/nomad: website/content/docs/concepts/acl/auth-methods/oidc.mdx

Your browser opens to the generated URL to complete the provider's login.
Enter the URL manually if the browser does not automatically open.

### Client assertions

Also known as "[private key JWT][]", client assertions offer a more secure

> authentication mechanism compared to client secrets. The OIDC client (in this
> case, Nomad) signs a JWT with an RSA private key (or HMAC key) that the OIDC
> provider verifies with an associated public key (or the same HMAC key).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
authentication mechanism compared to client secrets. The OIDC client, which in this
case is Nomad, signs a JWT with an RSA private key, or HMAC key, that the OIDC
provider verifies with an associated public key, or the same HMAC key.
```

style: moved important into out of parentheses

Author: I want to push back on this one a bit, because I think it's harder to follow the main thrust across the extra commas. In particular, I would be okay with some people skating past "(or HMAC key)" because it's the less secure option, and I think people who care about it will be looking for it specifically.

Here are some partial [auth method configuration][] examples. They focus only
on the client assertion feature; they are not complete, functional examples.

#### Nomad keyring

```json
{
  "OIDCDiscoveryURL": "https://your-keycloak-instance.com/realms/nomad",
  "OIDCClientID": "{your-client-id}",
  "BoundAudiences": ["{your-client-id}"],
  "OIDCClientAssertion": {
    "Audience": ["https://your-keycloak-instance.com/realms/nomad"],
    "KeySource": "nomad"
  }
}
```

In this example for Keycloak, Nomad signs the JWT with its own internal private
key. It sets the JWT's "kid" header as the key ID, as presented by Nomad's
[jwks.json][] endpoint.

> This is arguably the most secure option, because only Nomad has the private key.

Reviewer: What do you think of moving this intro statement before the code block?

Author: I like it!

Notice the distinction between the two "audience" fields:

> * `BoundAudiences` is often the application client ID (Nomad being the client),

Reviewer: Is there ever a case where `BoundAudiences` would not be the Nomad client ID?

Author: yeah, it seems to be conventional for OIDC providers to use the client ID, but it's not required by the JWT spec:

https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7519#section-4.1.3

>   The "aud" (audience) claim identifies the recipients that the JWT is
   intended for.  Each principal intended to process the JWT MUST
   identify itself with a value in the audience claim.  If the principal
   processing the claim does not identify itself with a value in the
   "aud" claim when this claim is present, then the JWT MUST be
   rejected.  In the general case, the "aud" value is an array of case-
   sensitive strings, each containing a StringOrURI value.  In the
   special case when the JWT has one audience, the "aud" value MAY be a
   single case-sensitive string containing a StringOrURI value.  **The
   interpretation of audience values is generally application specific.**
   Use of this claim is OPTIONAL.

emphasis mine at the bottom.

Basically, it can be anything. It's up to the sender of the JWT to (optionally) say "this is for _____" and it's up to the recipient of the JWT to (optionally) ask "is this for me?"

>   which Nomad will verify against what the OIDC provider sends to Nomad. Nomad

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  which Nomad verifies against what the OIDC provider sends to Nomad. Nomad
```

This option requires that the OIDC provider have network access to Nomad's JWKS,
either directly or via proxy, but otherwise requires no extra management of key
material beyond Nomad's built-in [keyring][key-management].

#### User provided key

```json
{
  "OIDCDiscoveryURL": "https://login.microsoftonline.com/{tenant}/v2.0",
  "OIDCClientID": "{app-client-id}",
  "BoundAudiences": ["{app-client-id}"],
  "OIDCClientAssertion": {
    "KeySource": "private_key",
    "KeyAlgorithm": "RS256",
    "PrivateKey": {
      "PemKey": "-----BEGIN RSA PRIVATE KEY-----\nMIIE...the-rest-of-the-key...uJ8fR\n-----END RSA PRIVATE KEY-----",
      "PemCert": "-----BEGIN CERTIFICATE-----\nMIID...the-rest-of-the-cert...GUCk=\n-----END CERTIFICATE-----"
    }
  }
}
```

In this example for Microsoft Entra ID (formerly Azure Active Directory),
we use a private RSA key that we generated separate from Nomad to sign the JWT.
We also provide an x509 certificate created from the key (or a CA), which Nomad
uses to derive an [x5t#S256][] thumbprint header. The certificate also must be
uploaded to the Entra ID app, so that when you try to log in, Entra ID can use

> the "x5t#S256" header to look up the public key that it has stored.

Reviewer: ```
This example for Microsoft Entra ID, formerly called Azure Active Directory,
uses a private RSA key generated separately from Nomad to sign the JWT.
Configuration also provides an x509 certificate created from the key or a CA. Nomad
uses this certificate to derive an [x5t#S256][] thumbprint header. You must upload the certificate to the Entra ID app, so that when you try to log in, Entra ID can use
the "x5t#S256" header to look up the public key that it has stored.
```

Some wording suggestions to get around using "we", which is reserved for when you are giving specific recommendation from Hashicorp. We should address the reader as "you". 
Also what do you think about moving this intro paragraph before the code block?

Author: Would it be weird to give the example itself a sort of agency? e.g. "This example (...) uses a private RSA key generated separately (...)"

In the previous example, Nomad was the subject doing the action, but here I can't say "You did it" because you didn't, and I can't say "You will do it" because you probably won't.

Happy make it an intro pgraph above the example!

Author: I think this is pretty common, e.g.

> This example for Microsoft Entra ID (formerly Azure Active Directory) uses an RSA private key generated separately from Nomad to sign the JWT. It also includes an x509 certificate created from the key (or a CA), which Nomad uses to (...)

Reviewer: Not weird! There are several examples in the configuration and job spec docs that use the "This example shows/demonstrates/illustrates..." construct to introduce a configuration example.

Could also do something like...

```markdown
This Microsoft Entra ID example illustrates configuring a private key for Nomad to sign the JWT key. 
- The `KeyAlgorithm` value indicates the RSA encryption type.
- The `PemKey` value is the private RSA key contents.
- The `PemCert` value is the contents of an X509 certificate from the key or a CA. Nomad uses this certificate to derive an [x5t#S256][] thumbprint header.

Note that if you implement this approach, you must upload the certificate to the Entra ID app, so that when you try to log in, Entra ID can use the "x5t#S256" header to look up the public key that it has stored.
```

Author: Hey I like that. I want to retain some of what I commented, but the bullets are a nice touch, and I like the new paragraph for the "Note" at the bottom.

I'll move these bits around some, and get back to ya :)

> The key and/or certificate may also be configured as filenames on disk on Nomad
> servers with the `PemKeyFile` and `PemCertFile` options, respectively. These
> allow you to rotate your key/cert without needing to update the auth method,
> but they must be present on the disk of any server that may become Nomad leader.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You may also configure the key and/or certificate as filenames on disk on Nomad
servers with the `PemKeyFile` and `PemCertFile` options, respectively. This
approach lets you rotate your key/cert without needing to update the auth method,
but the files must be present on the disk of any server that may become Nomad leader.
```

Style: some tweaks to use active voice

> Or, the `KeyID` may be provided directly, instead of a certificate, depending on
> your OIDC provider's requirements.
> 
> This allows you to bring your own RSA key for OIDC providers that do not
> support JWKS, network topologies that do not allow connectivity between the
> provider and Nomad JWKS, or if you want a signing key that is specifically
> and only for this purpose.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Depending on your OIDC provider's requirements, you may provide the `KeyID`
directly, instead of providing a certificate. This approach lets you to bring
your own RSA key for the following scenarios:

- OIDC providers that do not support JWKS
- Network topologies that do not allow connectivity between the provider and
  Nomad JWKS
- A signing key that is specifically and only for this purpose.
```

What do you think of reformatting to to make this paragraph easier for scanning?

Author: I dig the list and rephrasing, but the `KeyID` option is not tied to the scenario list on its own. "The approach" here is "private_key" `KeySource`, which requires one of `KeyID`, `PemCert`, or `PemCertFile`, so "This approach" should be a separate paragraph from `KeyID`. It's a summary of why you might want to consider the entire `#### User provided key` subsection.

Author: How's this?

> This approach lets you bring your own RSA key for the following scenarios:
> - Your OIDC provider does not support JWKS
> - Your network topology does not allow connectivity between the provider and Nomad JWKS, even via proxy
> - You want a signing key that is specifically and only for this purpose.

#### Client secret HMAC

```json
{
  "OIDCDiscoveryURL": "https://your-oidc-provider.com/oidc-discovery-url",
  "OIDCClientID": "your-client-id",
  "OIDCClientSecret": "long-secret-id-has-to-be-at-least-32-bytes",
  "OIDCClientAssertion": {
    "KeySource": "client_secret"
  }
}
```

> This example uses the `OIDCClientSecret` as an HMAC key to sign the JWT.

Reviewer: What do you think of moving L172 before the code block to serve as an intro?

> This is marginally more secure than a bare client secret, as the JWT is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This configuration is marginally more secure than a bare client secret, as the JWT is
```

  what you expect. Since claims data is logged verbatim and may contain
  sensitive information, do not use this option in production.

> - For client assertions, if `VerboseLogging` is enabled, then the Nomad leader
>   server will log a JWT when the auth method is created, and when someone makes
>   a login attempt. These JWTs are not 100% identical to what gets sent to the
>   OIDC provider (due to being time-bounded), but you can check the JWT headers
>   and claims to compare with your OIDC provider's requirements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- For client assertions, if `VerboseLogging` is enabled, then the Nomad leader
  server logs a JWT when the auth method is created and when someone makes
  a login attempt. These JWTs are not 100% identical to what gets sent to the
  OIDC provider due to being time-bound, but you can check the JWT headers
  and claims to compare with your OIDC provider's requirements.
```
Style: use present tense

  what you expect. Since claims data is logged verbatim and may contain
  sensitive information, do not use this option in production.

- For client assertions, if `VerboseLogging` is enabled, then the Nomad leader
  server logs a JWT when the auth method is created, and when someone makes
  a login attempt. These JWTs are not 100% identical to what gets sent to the

>   OIDC provider due to being time-bounded, but you can check the JWT headers

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  OIDC provider due to being time-bound, but you can check the JWT headers
```
I doubled-checked this in a dictionary

Author: I woulda sworn I changed that! ... oh yes, I did, in 2 other places, but not also this 3rd place :upside_down_face:
